Attention, much like your daily allowance of money, is
a limited resource, and in any particular moment, you can
only have that much of it. We live in an
age of constant distractions. 9:00 to 5:00 is out, 24/7
is in. With my smartphone in hand, I bring my
work with me everywhere, but our devices make us less
attentive. Having spent 10 years doing research in neurobiology, I
wondered what technology does to our brains. I set out
to understand the science of distractions and learn how to
be more focused and boost our productivity. By
some measures, we're bombarded by more than 63 notifications a
day. We receive over 90 emails and write about 40
of them. On average, we switch tasks every three minutes.
When we face distractions, two areas of the brain, the
parietal cortex and the frontal cortex, are in a sort
of tug of war with each other. Some research suggests
that the parietal cortex responds to distractions. The frontal cortex,
which is involved in cognitively demanding tasks, helps us maintain
focus, so we get distracted if the activity of the
parietal cortex gets through to the frontal cortex. If the
frontal cortex can keep the parietal in check, you stay
focused. The brain is deciding what's important and what's not,
and that takes effort. Even when you're cleaning your mailbox
and you're not actually doing hard cognitive work, you kinda
actually are because there's all these essentially micro decisions. Looking
at this email, do I need this? And so each
of those decision requires a little bit more of cognitive
effort, and so but when you add 2,000 of those,
uh, you end up with no, no power to make
any other important decisions, uh, after that. Um, you feel
depleted. Tell me a little bit about the study that
you did. It focused on email. What we found was
that checking email more frequently throughout the day was
associated, uh, with feeling more stressed and overwhelmed. In the
study, one group of people were asked to check their
email whenever they wanted throughout the day, while the other
group had to do it in batches. We found that
people who batched their emails three to five times a
day felt less stressed, uh, and less, um, overwhelmed.
Why are these tasks that seem really menial, why are
they so stressful and anxiety-inducing? You're
basically doing something that other people need. Let's
imagine that attention is this calm lake or, you
know, the reflecting pool, and then each notification is a
little drop in that lake. We can think of the
reflectiveness as, you know, the ability to actually focus on
what's going on around us, but when we have all
these drops all the time, now you get a reflecting
pool disturbed and frazzled. If email is like rain,
notifications seem like a storm to our productivity and our
ability to focus. The higher the cognitive load, the more
susceptible we are to new distractions. Notifications on our phones
draw our attention away from the task at hand, so
completing it may ultimately require more effort. Every time you
get distracted by a notification, you have to switch your
attention and switch it back. The switching in and of
itself actually requires cognitive effort, and so you end up
more depleted at the end of the day. So what
can we do as cell phone users to mitigate that?
Some things that I do is I do have scheduled
do not disturb times, which you can set on your
phone, when, you know, basically no notifications come in. In
general, I do keep my phone on silent. I
actually am, like most people, a little addicted to my
email and a little addicted to social media and messages,
so I do actually open those apps frequently enough that
I don't need to be reminded that I need to
open it every, every minute. So to tame new technologies,
we may first need to reconsider how and when we
rely on them. We did a study, not in an
organization, but on campus, where we asked students to find
a building either with their phones or without the help
of their phones. And yes, the students who relied on
their phones got to the building faster, but these same
students actually felt less connected to their community. And so
it's not a question of, you know, should we just
do away with these, uh, devices, but what is the
price of this convenient device? These social bonds that hold
society together, I think, are getting more and more chipped
away from us. Our devices and apps aren't the only
way to crush it at the office. Casual conversations at
work could make us feel more connected, happier, and productive.
That's what science is telling us.